JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: President Trump
turns up the heat on
members of his own party,
as the health care
makeover he wants faces the
possibility of rejection.
Then, in her first interview
since leaving office, former
Obama National Security Adviser
Susan Rice talks the
dangers for U.S. credibility
from Trump's White House.
Also ahead: Supreme Court
nominee Neil Gorsuch faces more
questions about his view of the
Constitution and the law.
And as colors drain from coral
in Australia's Great Barrier
Reef, we examine how warming
waters are killing the world's
largest living structure.
JENNIFER SMITH, Scripps
Institution of Oceanography:
Corals reefs as we know
them will not exist
in the next 10, 20, 30 years.
We could single-handedly be
responsible for the extinction
of an entire ecosystem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is pressing hard on members
of his own party for support
of the Republican bill
to replace Obamacare.
But, at this hour, it is
not clear he has the votes.
The House is scheduled to
vote on the bill on Thursday.
For millions, it would change
the amount of money they receive
to buy insurance and eventually
end an expansion of Medicaid.
Last week, the Congressional
Budget Office estimated 24
million more people would be
uninsured over a decade
if it were to pass.
Lisa Desjardins reports on
the battle from Capitol Hill.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the basement
of the Capitol, House members
heading to more predictable
votes today conveyed
the Republican divide
over the big health care
vote set for tomorrow.
New York's Tom Reed became a
yes in the last day, thanks
to help for his district.
REP.
TOM REED (R), New York: I
think just a continuation
of the information, the
improvements, as the
detail come out.
I think more and more
members are getting more and
more comfortable with it.
LISA DESJARDINS: But not New
Jersey's Leonard Lance, who met
with the president yesterday.
He didn't change your mind?
REP.
LEONARD LANCE (R), New Jersey:
I think that he wanted to
listen to members, and I was
pleased he invited me and
other members to meet with him.
LISA DESJARDINS: That
sounds like a polite no.
He didn't change your mind.
REP.
LEONARD LANCE: I was honored
to be in the White House and
to meet with the president.
LISA DESJARDINS: The semantic
dance comes because GOP
leaders may not have the votes
they need, this as their bill
hit its last stop before a
final vote the House floor,
the House Rules Committee.
It's stacked with bill
supporters, but Republican
Rob Woodall worried
about noted the bumpy
ride
REP.
ROB WOODALL (R), Georgia:
It seems like we're
going out of our way to
make this more divisive
than it has to be.
LISA DESJARDINS: Budget
Chairman Diane Black
aimed for pragmatic unity.
REP.
DIANE BLACK (R), Tennessee: We
all know that analogy that is
made, it's kind of like sausage,
not pretty watching it being
made, but tastes pretty good at
the end when you get it right.
So I think that that's something
we have to encourage all
members to continue to bring
their suggestions forward.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meantime,
President Trump tried to wrangle
votes, meeting with unhappy,
and much needed,
conservatives privately.
Publicly, at least,
he was confident.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: We're
going to help get this done.
We're going to get
it figured out.
It's a tough situation our
country has been put in.
It's not easy.
LISA DESJARDINS: But the White
House effort has still not won
over the pivotal conservative
Freedom Caucus.
Chairman Mark Meadows:
REP.
MARK MEADOWS (R), North
Carolina: We had a great
meeting with the vice president.
You know, they are fully
engaged, but I can say this
at this particular point.
We need changes to the
underlying bill before we
vote on it in the House.
LISA DESJARDINS: This as
pressure keeps mounting
from outside the Capitol.
Among those whipping for
no votes, and dinging
those who vote yes, are
prominent conservative
groups the Heritage Foundation
and Club for Growth.
Pushing in the opposite
direction, the National
Taxpayers Union, which
came out for the bill
today.
As Republicans worked behind
the scenes, Democrats were happy
to provide public optics, with
a flag-waving news conference
celebrating the seventh
anniversary of the Affordable
Care Act.
House Minority
Leader Nancy Pelosi:
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader: Today, we are
gathered to say how proud we
are of what was accomplished
and contrast it with what is
being proposed, will be less
care for more money.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
Democrats called up
doctors, rural hospital
workers, business owners and
patients, all stressing
opposition to Medicaid
cuts in the GOP bill, as
did former Vice President
Biden.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Former Vice
President of the United States:
We are talking about eliminating
close to a trillion dollars
in benefits that go to people
to able to meet the commitment
we made that health care is a
right and we're transferring
all that to the wealthy.
LISA DESJARDINS: But it
is the current White House
now in the spotlight.
QUESTION: Is there a plan B?
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: This is no plan B.
There is plan A and plan A.
We're going to get this done.
LISA DESJARDINS: An emphatic
message to Republicans from the
White House press secretary.
SEAN SPICER: This is it.
If you want to see
Obamacare repealed and
replaced, this is the vote.
LISA DESJARDINS:
And if they say no?
To that, President
Trump said today, "We
will see what happens."
And just in the past few
minutes, we have some news
out of the Freedom Caucus.
Reporters say that the chairman
of that caucus, Mark Meadows,
who we featured, now says he's
encouraged by negotiations,
and he sees some headway.
That's different than a
yes, but indicates perhaps
some movement late tonight.
Also, as we speak, the
House Rules Committee right
above me is still meeting.
They have been at it
since 10:00 this morning.
So far, no changes to the
bill, but they're expected
to go late tonight, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Lisa, and
as you showed, there have been
a few members throughout the
day who are now saying they're
shifting in the direction
of yes, that they have been
persuaded by specific promises.
So what do you know about that?
LISA DESJARDINS: They're
absolutely is horse-trading
going on today.
Two cases that we know about
for sure, Pennsylvania's
Lou Barletta, he tweeted
out that he is now
a yes after getting a guarantee
from House leadership for a
vote on a bill that he wants
that would end -- that
would ban tax credits for
undocumented immigrants.
Also, Steve King of Iowa, he
is now a yes, sources tell
me, because he has gotten an
assurance that the
president will push for
some insurance regulation
changes in the Senate.
Now, those are two new yes
votes, Judy, but there's also
at least two, probably more,
new no votes, some on the
record, some off the record.
So it's very fluid.
I think it's hard to draw
conclusions right now
about where this bill is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa,
what about those who are
truly still on the fence?
What is known about what they
want or what they need to vote?
LISA DESJARDINS: Here's
what conservatives want.
Conservatives say they want this
bill to include a full repeal
of the individual mandate and
also of the essential
benefits that says what must
be in insurance packages.
The leadership in the House
and Senate say they can't do
that because of the rules of
the reconciliation
process, because of the
way the Senate works.
The House Freedom Caucus says
they're not so sure that's true.
So they're having a
procedural argument, but it
also is about substance.
It's about trying to end
the mandate, which they
don't think this bill does.
That's a lot of the
discussion right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Lisa, will the Republican
leadership go ahead and hold a
vote tomorrow if they're not
sure they have the votes?
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, I
spoke to one member who told
me that he has heard that
Speaker Ryan will hold
the vote regardless, but
that's just one member.
And history tell us, Judy,
usually, if they don't have the
votes, speakers will pull the
bill.
But we're in unusual
times, as we all know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We
are in unusual times.
Lisa Desjardins, thank you.
In the day's other news: Chaos
erupted outside Britain's
Parliament Building, and when it
was over, at least
four people were dead.
They included an attacker who
drove into a crowd, a policeman
he stabbed before being
shot dead, and two
civilians hit by the car.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News
reports from London.
PAUL DAVIES: Parliament
in lock down.
Emergency vehicles
block all roads.
An air ambulance arrives
to collect the casualties.
The security services have
warned there'd been many close
calls before, but this was
the day the terror threat
arrived at Westminster,
and even entered the
grounds of the mother
of parliaments.
Here, a police officer
throws a bag of emergency
supplies over the fence.
Inside the grounds, medics are
desperately trying to help a
colleague who has been stabbed.
A second person seen here
being treated on the left of
this picture is believed to be
the attacker who's
been shot by police.
As news spreads, so does panic.
Tourists run away, and then
we hear the sound of gunshots.
While armed officers enter
Parliament, M.P.s are briefed
on what's happening outside.
DAVID LIDINGTON, Parliament
Member: What I am able to say
to the House is that there
has been a serious
incident within the estate.
PAUL DAVIES: But there was
more to this horrifying
event, much more.
On Westminster Bridge,
a trail of carnage.
A car had mounted the pavement,
deliberately mowing down
pedestrians as it headed for the
houses of Parliament.
The injured are scattered
where they were knocked down.
There are multiple casualties.
The car reached the perimeter
of Parliament before
crashing into railings.
In this image, there's still
smoke coming from its engine.
Tourists mill around it.
Police say the man on this
stretcher is the one who
was shot by their officers.
MARK ROWLEY, Metropolitan Police
Acting Deputy Commission: And
whilst we currently believe
there was only one attacker, I'm
sure the public will understand
us taking every precaution
in locking down and searching
the area as thoroughly and
exhaustively as possible.
PAUL DAVIES: At this stage,
police are not speculating about
the motive of the attacker,
the man they are
calling a terrorist.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The incident
came one year after Islamist
militants killed 32 people
in Brussels, Belgium.
Turkey's president
issued a stark warning
to European states today.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan demanded
that they stop barring Turkish
government officials from
rallies of Turkish emigres.
They're meant to drum up support
for expanding Erdogan's powers.
In Ankara today, the Turkish
leader said that Europe has to
change its ways, or face the
consequences.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN,
Turkish President (through
translator): These incidents
are closely followed.
If you continue this way,
no European in any part
of the world can walk
safely on the streets.
If you stay on this
dangerous path, you will
sustain the biggest damage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Turkey holds
a referendum on expanding
Erdogan's powers next month.
There's word tonight that
U.S. agencies may have
intercepted communications
by Trump transition
officials.
The chair of the House
Intelligence Committee,
Devin Nunes, says it
happened during legal
surveillance of
foreign nationals.
Nunes briefed the president at
the White House today, and said
the information is not related
to any contacts
with the Russians.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES (R), California:
What I saw has nothing to do
with Russia and nothing to do
with the Russian
investigation, has everything
to do with possible
surveillance activities.
And the president needs to
know that these intelligence
reports are out there.
And I have a duty
to tell him that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nunes says he
believes the intercepts may
have been improperly included
in intelligence reports.
The chairman did share
the information with
the ranking Democrat on
the intelligence panel
before going public.
That is representative
-- or, rather, he didn't
share it with him.
And that is Representative
Adam Schiff of California.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California:
The chairman will need to decide
whether he is the chairman
of an independent
investigation into conduct
which includes allegations
of potential coordination
between the Trump campaign and
the Russians, or he's going
to act as a surrogate of the
White House, because
he cannot do both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chairman
Nunes repeated today that
there's still no evidence
for the president's
claim that he was wiretapped.
But Mr. Trump said he
feels -- quote -- "somewhat
vindicated" by this disclosure.
This was day three of
the Senate confirmation
hearings for Supreme Court
nominee Neil Gorsuch,
and he again declined
to divulge his views on
a host of legal issues.
Republicans gave him glowing
reviews, but Democrats
complained that he's concealing
his views to win confirmation.
We will have excerpts
from today's testimony and
analysis later in the program.
Representatives of 68 nations
gathered in Washington today
to assess the fight against
the Islamic State group.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: The full 68-nation
anti-ISIS coalition convened
at a moment of major gains.
Secretary of State
Rex Tillerson:
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: Hard-fought victories
in Iraq and Syria have swung the
momentum in our
coalition's favor.
Defeating ISIS is the
United States' number
one goal in the region.
JOHN YANG: Tillerson called
for other nations to step up
their own efforts, and he said
the focus of the ISIS fight will
soon shift to stabilization.
That would involve
creating conditions so
refugees can return home.
Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi appealed for new
attempts to bring peace.
HAIDER AL-ABADI, Iraqi Prime
Minister (through translator): I
call for containing the regional
differences and regional
conflicts because these are the
main reasons these terrorist
groups rise.
JOHN YANG: In Iraq,
government forces pressed
the now-five-month
battle to retake Mosul
from Islamic State fighters.
MAN (through translator): The
security forces are continuing
to help move civilians.
ISIS is done.
I swear they are running.
They have nothing
left in Iraq, I swear.
JOHN YANG: Some of the
fiercest fighting is unfolding
around the al-Nuri Mosque.
That's where ISIS leader Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi declared
a caliphate in July 2014.
The ISIS militants are also
steadily losing ground in Syria.
Today, U.S. aircraft dropped
Syrian Kurdish fighters and
allied forces near the town of
Tabqa, about 30 miles from
Raqqa, the self-proclaimed
capital of ISIS.
If the operation is successful,
it would essentially cut off the
militants' Western approach to
the city.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North
Korea test-fired
another missile today.
But, this time, the U.S.
military says it blew
up just after launch.
Hours later, an American
B-1B bomber joined South
Korean fighter jets in
a show of deterrence.
Less than a month ago, the North
had test-fired four ballistic
missiles that landed in Japanese
waters.
An urgent new appeal
today about famine in
four war-torn countries.
The International Committee
of the Red Cross says that it
needs $300 million in emergency
aid in the next
three to four months.
Otherwise, it says mass
starvation looms across
Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan, and Northeastern
Nigeria.
DOMINIK STILLHART, International
Committee of the Red Cross:
This is not business as
usual; 20 million people facing
starvation is not something
that we are dealing with
every day.
And, therefore, we
really need to act now.
And, if we act now, especially
in Yemen and in Somalia,
famine can be averted.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Nations has also warned
of the famine danger.
Back in this country,
the governor of Arkansas
signed a law allowing
concealed handguns at
state colleges, other
government sites and some bars.
Gun owners would have up to
eight hours of active shooter
training -- have to have.
Supporters said it will
let law-abiding people
defend themselves.
Opponents said it will make
everyday life more dangerous.
Police in Los Angeles
say fear of deportation
is now discouraging
Latinos from reporting
crimes.
Chief Charlie Beck
says there's been a 25
percent drop in Latinos
reporting sexual assaults
since January.
Reports of domestic violence
are down 10 percent.
Beck says that people are
afraid of contacting police
or appearing in court.
And Wall Street had a quiet day.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost six points
to close at 20661.
The Nasdaq rose 27 points,
and the S&P 500 added four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Russia file, allegations
that a former Trump campaign
manager worked on behalf of
Russia -- one on one with Susan
Rice in her first interview
since leaving public office; the
Gorsuch hearings, more questions
for the Supreme Court nominee;
and much more.
From April through August of
last year, Paul Manafort was the
chairman of the Trump campaign.
He has been under intense
scrutiny for his business and
political ties to both Russia
and Ukraine.
Today, the Associated Press
uncovered new information
about Manafort and his dealings
with Russians.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: According to
the Associated Press, Manafort
worked for a Russian billionaire
in 2005 with close ties
to President Vladimir
Putin, and drew up plans
to influence politics
in the U.S. that would favor
Russian government interests.
For more on all of this, we
turn to Jeff Horwitz of the
AP, who helped break the story.
Jeff, let's lay out
your findings here.
JEFF HORWITZ,
Associated Press: Sure.
So, according to memos
that we obtained that
Manafort wrote to Oleg
Deripaska and his associates
- - and Deripaska is a Russian
aluminum magnate, very close to
Vladimir Putin -- Manafort was
working for Deripaska
for a number of years,
starting sort of in '04,
and probably continuing
to about 2009, on a whole
bunch of projects in Eastern
Europe, with some ties into the
U.S. as well.
And so what Manafort was
basically promising to do in
the memos we have obtained is to
- - was attempt to undercut
Orange revolutions, so
sort of revolutions that
were -- as a reference
to the 2004 uprising in Ukraine
that overthrew a pro-Russian
government, to try and prevent
that and sort of promote the
Putin government's interests
throughout the region.
And part of that was focused
on the U.S. as well, with the
idea being that Manafort would
use contacts in
Washington as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, in the
context of what's happening now
in the Trump administration,
what's the connection between
what Paul Manafort did 10 years
ago or 12 years ago and what's
happening today?
JEFF HORWITZ: So, Paul
Manafort's work is
historical on this front.
He had a falling with
Oleg Deripaska over a
business deal that soured.
And, as best as we know,
there is no continued
business relationship
between them at all.
But the thing that is important
here is that Paul Manafort, in
these memos, both demonstrated
a willingness and sort of a
knowledge of the region and set
of contacts to do work on behalf
of the Russian government.
In fact, that's one
of the things that he
was even promising in
these memos, was that
he would happily do
work directly on behalf
of the Russian state,
if it was of interest.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well,
what's the White House
response been to this?
JEFF HORWITZ: So, the White
House's response to this has
been, one, to note that it was
10 years ago.
And that's emphatically true.
And they have been very careful
to say that Donald Trump,
President Donald Trump knew
nothing about Paul
Manafort's past clients.
Now, they are -- also,
of course, have sort
of downplayed the role
that Mr. Manafort played
during the campaign.
He was the campaign chairman.
He was in charge of the ship
for, I think, a number of
months, certainly including the
Republican National Convention.
And, you know, some of his
people sort of have stayed
on in Trump's orbit as well.
But the White House's position
is that this has nothing to
do with Mr. Trump, that Paul
Manafort is a private citizen,
that he did nothing illegal,
and that it's time to move
on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is
Paul Manafort being
investigated in any way now?
JEFF HORWITZ: So, yes, there
are a number of different
things going on, and some of
this has been -- a lot
of this has been publicly
reported already.
There are sort of a
number of different views.
And, of course, we also
have members of Congress
who are at this point
hinting that they want
to subpoena him or haul him
in front of committees in
either the Senate or the House.
And so that, I think, is going
to be something where we might
be getting a bit more public
exposure to this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, to be
clear, this is not the reason
that he no longer was chairman
of Donald Trump's campaign.
That is kind of
a separate issue.
JEFF HORWITZ: No, no.
He left the campaign in August
amid a whole bunch of concerns
as to whether they -- first
of all, whether the Ukrainian
government might have paid him
cash payments in a way that
was potentially illicit.
That was sort of a
controversy back then.
And then we also reported
in, I believe, in 2013, he
actually had been doing lobbying
work or had been -- his firm had
been overseeing lobbying work
in the United States on behalf
of those Ukrainian interests
without disclosing it.
So, those two things together
sort of preceded his departure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, Jeff Horwitz of
the Associated Press,
joining us from Washington,
thanks so much.
JEFF HORWITZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In this morning's
Washington Post, some tough
words for President Trump
and his administration
led the opinion pages.
We spoke earlier this evening
with former Obama White House
National Security Adviser
Susan Rice, the
author of that piece.
It was her first interview
since leaving the White House.
I began by asking about
the allegations leveled
today by House Intelligence
Committee Chairman
Devin Nunes that Trump
transition officials,
including the president,
may have been swept
up in surveillance of
foreigners at the end of
the Obama administration.
SUSAN RICE, Former U.S.
National Security Adviser:
I know nothing about this.
I was surprised to see
reports from Chairman
Nunes on that count today.
And let's back up and
recall where we have been.
The president of the United
States accused his predecessor,
President Obama, of wiretapping
Trump Tower during the campaign.
Nothing of the sort occurred,
and we have heard that
confirmed by the director of the
FBI, who also pointed out that
no president, no White House
can order the surveillance
of another American citizen.
That can only come from the
Justice Department, with the
approval of a FISA court.
So, today, I really don't
know to what Chairman
Nunes was referring, but
he said that whatever
he was referring to was a
legal, lawful surveillance,
and that it was potentially
incidental collection
on American citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SUSAN RICE: And I think
it's important for
people to understand
what incidental means.
That means that the target
was either a foreign
entity or somebody under
criminal investigation,
and that the Americans who
were talking to those targets
may have been picked up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I wanted
to ask you about this, because,
as you also know, in the last
few weeks, The New York
Times has reported that,
in the final days of the
Obama administration,
individuals went out of their
way to spread information
throughout the government about
what they knew about
intelligence that the
Russians had interfered
in the election last
year, and that there may
have been a connection with
Trump campaign officials.
So, that story has now been
out there for several weeks.
Could there be a
connection here?
SUSAN RICE: I'm not
aware of any connection.
I read The New York Times story.
I must say, Judy, as one of
the most senior White House
officials and the most senior
responsible for national
security, I found that
report a bit perplexing.
I wasn't aware of any
orders given to disseminate
that kind of information.
(CROSSTALK)
SUSAN RICE: So, I have no idea
whether that was the case.
But the fact is that the
president did request
back in December that the
intelligence community
compile all of the information
that it had on what had
transpired during the campaign
with respect to the Russians
involving themselves in
the presidential campaign.
And that report was
provided to the American
people in unclassified
form and to Congress
in classified form
in early January.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And was there
a concern, though, inside the
Obama administration, inside the
White House that the new Trump
administration might not follow
up on that intelligence that
had been gathered?
SUSAN RICE: I don't think that
was the concern, because, to
the extent that there was any
need to follow up, it wouldn't
be done necessarily by the White
House, but by the intelligence
community, and by the Justice
Department, if appropriate.
I think our interest was, and
the president's direction was,
let us make sure that we have
compiled and put together in
one place all the information
that we have, so that it is
there for the new
administration, it's there
for the American people,
and there for Congress
to utilize as they see fit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's --
that brings us to the opinion
piece that you wrote that
appeared today in The Washington
Post, Ambassador Rice, in which
you -- what you describe as
a pattern of false
statements from this
president could jeopardize
the national security of
this country.
That's a serious charge.
What did you mean by that?
SUSAN RICE: Well,
let me explain, Judy.
I think the American people
know that, over the last weeks
of the administration, it's
now been almost -- almost
exactly two months - - we have
heard a number of striking and
actually patently misleading
statements from not only the
president, but also from his
principal spokespersons.
And those statements are heard
and digested by the rest of
the world, whether they are
our friends or our adversaries.
The Wall Street Journal
made a very similar point
today on its editorial page.
And the point is this: The
United States of America is
the leading power in the world.
Our friends and our adversaries
respect us in large measure
because they know that we
are steady.
We are fact-based.
We are serious.
And when we have the White House
of the United States putting
out information that everybody
can see to be inaccurate,
if not deliberately false,
it shakes the credibility
and the confidence
of our allies, and it lends
doubt to our adversaries
who may miscalculate.
And it undermines the confidence
of the American people in what
comes out of the White House,
which is very detrimental in
the event we have a national
crisis and we need to rally
around the flag.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, just to play
devil's advocate for a moment,
how do you or how does anyone
else know, though, that this is
just not the rough beginning,
rocky beginning of a new
administration, and that other
countries can see through
mistakes, whatever you want to
call them, statements,
and they're looking at
the overall picture and
U.S. national security
is not really in jeopardy?
SUSAN RICE: Well, Judy, I think
if it were one or two such
statements, and then the -- they
were corrected when the
facts were plain, that
would be one thing.
But we have had statements
ranging from the allegation that
three million to five million
illegal immigrants voted in
our elections, which has been
debunked on a bipartisan basis
by members of Congress, to
this allegation that we have
already discussed, which was
quite shocking, that the
president's predecessor,
President Obama, had
illegally wiretapped
his office building
during the campaign.
And we have heard from
bipartisan leaders of Congress,
as well as from the director
of the FBI, that there's
no information to
support that allegation.
And yet there's been no
correction, no apology.
And I think the world is not
impervious to what happens
here in the United States.
And, on the contrary, they
watch it very, very carefully.
And they wonder and worry,
what does this mean?
Can we trust the word
of the White House?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in the
meantime, different subject.
Today, the Trump administration
convened a meet hearing in
Washington of the leaders
from 68 countries to talk
about the fight against
ISIS, the path forward.
And, among other things,
officials of this administration
are saying the reason ISIS
is still the threat that it
is to the world is in part
because of the failed policies
of the Obama administration.
SUSAN RICE: Well, I think the
facts don't bear that out.
The strategy that the Trump
administration is pursuing,
at the behest of the very same
military leaders who advised
the Obama administration,
is virtually unchanged.
The fundamentals of the
strategy, which are to work with
partners, in the case of Iraq,
the Iraqi government, in the
case of Syria, with the Syrian
democratic forces, a mixture
of Kurds and Arabs, to take
back territory, remains the
thrust of our strategies, as it
should be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The last thing
I want to ask you about is a
decision that was announced
or that appears to have been
made by this administration
to shift more authority over
military operations to the
Pentagon, in the context of
criticism that under President
Obama there was too
micromanaging out of
the White House about
everything that happened
that the military did.
SUSAN RICE: Well, I
think that criticism
is a well-trodden line.
I have heard it many times.
And I think the fact is this.
President Obama took very,
very seriously his role
as commander in chief.
Now, you know, when things
go wrong, as, unfortunately,
tragically, they did in
Yemen recently during
the first military raid of this
administration, or when we're
trying to figure out what just
happened in Syria with respect
to a bombing that caused a
number of civilian casualties
- - some say it was a mosque --
we say it wasn't - - it's very
important that the commander
in chief own responsibility
for decisions such as that
and is willing to say to the
men and women in uniform,
that was my choice, and
not blame it on others,
whether the commanders
or people below him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former National
Security Adviser to President
Obama Susan Rice, thank you very
much.
SUSAN RICE: Good to
be with you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Australia's Great Barrier
Reef under threat.
But, first, a look at
the third day of Supreme
Court confirmation
hearings and what more
we learned about Neil Gorsuch.
Joining me at the table tonight,
"PBS NewsHour" hour Supreme
Court analyst Marcia Coyle of
"The National Law Journal," Amy
Howe, editor of SCOTUSblog.com.
Pam Karlan, she's a professor
of law at Stanford University.
She worked in the Justice
Department during the
Obama administration.
And Ilya Shapiro, he's a
senior fellow in constitutional
studies at the Cato Institute.
It's a libertarian think tank.
And welcome all of you
back to the "NewsHour."
I want us to start by listening
to something that Senator
Dianne Feinstein had to say.
She pressed Judge Gorsuch
on his views about how to
interpret the Constitution.
And she expressed some concern
over what he said before on
the importance of Supreme Court
precedent.
Let's listen.
SEN.
DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: We talked
about precedent.
And what's happened is, every
Republican-appointed judge has
gone back and is a no vote.
So, how does -- how
does one look at you?
For the life of me, I really
don't know, when you're there,
what you're going to do with
it.
NEIL GORSUCH, Supreme Court
Nominee: Senator, all I can do
is -- I can't promise you how
I would rule in a
particular case.
That would be deeply
wrong to sit here at
a confirmation table.
And I think we agree on that,
that it would be a violation
of the independent judiciary
for a nominee to a court to
make a promise on any case
in order to win confirmation.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R),
South Carolina: Are
you an originalist?
NEIL GORSUCH: I'm happy
to be called that.
I do worry about the use
of labels in our civic
discussion to sometimes
ignore the underlying
ideas, as if originalism
belonged to a party.
It doesn't.
As if it belonged to
an ideological wing.
It doesn't.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, here's
what I say about originalism.
Whether you like it or not,
is it bound by the law?
NEIL GORSUCH: Of course it is.
It's the whole point of
how you interpret the law.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM: Now, to those
who believe the Constitution
is a living, breathing document
that can speak to you and
nobody else, that bothers me.
The bottom line is, there are
different ways of looking at
the role of being a judge.
Do you believe that your way
of looking at being a judge
has stood the test of time?
NEIL GORSUCH: I do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Marcia
Coyle, what did we learn
about Judge Gorsuch from this?
MARCIA COYLE, "The
National Law Journal": OK.
Well, I think two things were
going on here in the exchange,
particularly with Senator
Feinstein.
First of all, she was trying
to get at, what kind of
originalist is Judge Gorsuch?
They're not all the same.
And, in fact, Justice Scalia,
who was a self-proclaimed
originalist, often said
that Justice Clarence
Thomas was the only
true originalist on
the Supreme Court.
So, she was trying to get
a sense of him and also her
concern about precedent.
I mean, it is true every Supreme
Court nominee has testified
to respect for precedent.
But precedents, old
decisions, do get overruled.
The question was, what factors
do you use, can you justify
upsetting the law by overruling
an old decision?
And Judge Gorsuch did lay out
the factors multiple times,
even though he won't commit
to not overruling
a specific case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Karlan, what
did you take away from this?
PAM KARLAN, Stanford
Law School: Well, here's
what was interesting.
He did commit to not
overruling Brown against
Board Of Education.
He said that case was
correctly decided.
He did commit to not overturning
Griswold about the right
of married couples to use
contraception.
But he refused to commit to
the same idea with regard to
cases like Roe or cases like
Lawrence.
And there's no honest
originalist who really
can say that the people
who ratified the 14th
Amendment in 1868 thought
that it protected gay people,
given that the same people who
ratified that amendment
all prohibited sodomy
in their states.
So, I think he gave us a very
clear sense of what kind of
an originalist he was today
in the way he answered
questions about different
lines of precedent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ilya Shapiro?
ILYA SHAPIRO, Cato
Institute: Well, Pam, I'm
an honest originalist.
At least I try to be.
And I would say that the
14th Amendment does protect
gay rights in various ways.
I filed briefs supporting
the challengers in Obergefell
and all the others.
The Cato Institute has long
been about that, because you
have to understand that you do
originalism at the right time.
You're not looking into
the brains, into minds
of the people that were
enacting it or ratifying
it.
You look at the words.
And what did the words
mean at the time?
Equal means equal, just
like you don't have to
update the Constitution
to apply the Interstate
Commerce Clause to airplanes
or the Internet, because
that's interstate commerce.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Howe,
I'm going to come to you to
ask you to adjudicate this.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY HOWE, SCOTUSblog.com: Well,
I think that this is really
sort of a bigger picture issue,
which is that the senators,
the Democrats senators, are
trying to get more information
about Gorsuch.
And, you know, Donald Trump
said he wanted to appoint
justices in the mold of Scalia
and Clarence Thomas.
And the Democratic senators
are trying to figure out,
well, you know, what makes him
think that?
You know, OK, and there's
originalism, but what kind of
originalism -- originalist are
you?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
there's something else I
want you all to listen to.
During his campaign, we know
that then-candidate Donald Trump
promised to appoint justices
with similar philosophies
to himself and to
Justice Antonin Scalia.
Now, Democratic Senator
Patrick Leahy questioned
- - today questioned
Judge Gorsuch on where
his views are.
SEN.
PATRICK LEAHY (D), Vermont:
Mr. Priebus said you have the
vision of Donald Trump, and,
by nominating you, Donald Trump
was talking about changing
potentially 40 years of law,
suggesting you are coming
in as a Trojan horse.
What vision do you share
with President Trump?
NEIL GORSUCH: Senator, I mean,
no disrespect to any other
person in saying, they don't
speak for me.
And I don't speak for them.
You know, I have great
admiration for Justice Scalia,
as we have talked about.
I have admiration for every
member of this committee and
for the president of the United
States, for the vice president
of the United States.
But, respectfully, none
of you speaks for me.
I speak for me.
I am a judge.
I am independent.
I make up my own mind.
SEN.
RICHARD DURBIN (D-IL), Minority
Whip: Judge, in eight out
of 10 cases that came before
you, you ruled against the
students with disabilities.
(CROSSTALK)
NEIL GORSUCH: I'm sure
they were unanimous panels.
And to suggest that I have
some animus against children,
Senator, would be mistaken.
SEN.
RICHARD DURBIN: Judge, please.
I'm not suggesting that.
You are -- what I'm basically
saying to you is, I can only
look at your court opinions,
the words you write,
because, like many nominees,
you are careful in your
testimony before us.
You have told us time and again,
no place for my heart here.
This is all about the facts.
This is all about the law.
I don't buy that.
I don't think that the decisions
of courts are so robotic,
so programmatic that all you
need to do is to look at the
facts and look at the law and
there's an obvious conclusion.
If that were the case, there
would never be a dissent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy
Howe, do we -- what do
we take away from this?
This was about whether
Judge Gorsuch sees people
as human beings, or is
he blindly following
the law, it seemed?
AMY HOWE: Well, what I would
say, I think maybe what Durbin
was trying to say -- and
maybe it was just inartfully
phrased -- is - - and he had
something there, the idea Judge
Gorsuch keeps
saying, I'm a judge.
I apply the laws to the facts.
But it's not always that
easy, particularly when you
get to the Supreme Court.
Cases get to the Supreme
Court because they're hard.
And as Senator Durbin said, if
it were that easy, a computer
could do it, there would
be no dissents.
And so what he was, I think,
trying to get at was, you
know, like, when there's a gray
area, what else are you
going to bring to the table?
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do
you take away from all
this, Ilya Shapiro?
ILYA SHAPIRO: Well, I
look at it another couple
of changes during the
day's questioning with
Al Franken about arbitration,
and then with Ben Sasse
about the same topic.
And this goes towards how some
judges are simply more willing
to bend the law to achieve
a just result, because,
otherwise, they don't like the
result that they're getting.
And Franken was talking about
how arbitration provisions
might go against the little guy.
And then Ben Sasse said, well,
I might agree with you in those
cases that you're presenting.
So we, senators, the Congress,
should change those laws.
And that's where the debate is.
Sometimes, just reaching a
result that seems unjust, that
is an indication for Congress
to change it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pick up
on that, Pam Karlan.
PAM KARLAN: Well, the question
is what the interpretation
of the Arbitration Act is.
The current Supreme Court,
with a Republican majority, has
narrowed people's ability to
get into court by reading a
law that's been around since
the 1920s more narrowly than
the court used to.
And so I think it's important
to understand that laws can
be read in a lot of different
ways.
They're not always
absolutely clear.
And judges have to bring
judgment to those laws.
And conservatives and liberals
have very different views
on how to read those laws.
It isn't mechanical.
Amy Howe is exactly right.
And to the extent that judges
suggest this is mechanical,
with the kind of balls and
strikes metaphors, or the I'm
just a lawyer applying the
-- I'm just a judge applying
the law, they're hiding what
is often going on, which is
the exercise of judgment about,
what does a word like -- a
phrase like free and appropriate
education in the Endrew case
mean?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle?
MARCIA COYLE: I tend to agree
more with Pam, because I think
that Senator Durbin was trying
- - if you had listened to
the whole exchange, he was
trying to find exactly that.
Is this a judge who
reads laws narrowly?
In this particular case
involving individuals
with disabilities in
education, the children,
he focused on a word that
Judge Gorsuch had in an opinion
that appeared to narrow the
standard for these children
to get the help they needed
in the -- in public schools or
outside of public schools.
So, I think, again, this was
an effort, even if not really
direct and clear, to try to
understand how Judge
Gorsuch approaches the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, in this
final excerpt from today's
hearing that I want to share,
this was an exchange with
Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, a
Democrat, about a court decision
on campaign finance.
Now, Judge Gorsuch expressed
concern about the idea of
judges being political and the
role of politics in
the federal court.
Let's listen.
NEIL GORSUCH: I'm distressed to
hear you think that judges or
the Supreme Court is an organ
of a party.
That, to me, is just --
I know you feel that way.
And that distresses me.
SEN.
SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D),
Rhode Island: It distresses
me, too, quite a lot.
NEIL GORSUCH: And
I just don't...
SEN.
BEN SASSE (R), Nebraska:
Most people aren't
watching these hearings.
And most people are going
to see some headline
summary of what happened.
If they see something that looks
like Republicans voted one way
and Democrats voted another
way, and they have echoing
in their ears the sounds of
people saying that you are some
sort of a shill for
big business, and that
the American people
should be scared of you,
we will have in this body
done something to further
erode the public trust.
And so I sincerely hope that
my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle, as they approach
voting, will recognize that
the audience after they vote
isn't just people in their next
primary who want to see a
greater politicization of every
question in American life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I'm going
to come to you, Ilya Shapiro.
Did we come away from at least
from what we heard so far
thinking these courts are more
political than ever because
of the kinds of questions
and answers we're hearing?
ILYA SHAPIRO:
Well, I'm not sure.
I think we come away thinking
the senators are more political
even than we possibly could
have imagined.
It was a very fraught
hearing in that way.
But if you look at the actual
facts, at the Supreme Court,
the Democratically appointed
justices vote together more
often, certainly in the
controversial cases, than
the Republican-appointed
ones.
We always talk about, will
Kennedy go one way or another?
Will Roberts do
another Obamacare vote
of a certain kind?
There's much less debate about,
will Sotomayor defect or what
crazy thing will Breyer come
up with these days?
So, I think there's just
a lot of intellectual
fervent on the right.
It's -- and so that's what
gives people -- turns them on
or turns them off the court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle,
are we picking up more from
listening to these exchanges
about whether we should be
reading politics into so much
of what the Supreme Court does?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, I think
everybody has to not be naive
about what the Supreme Court
does.
The Supreme Court is a
political institution.
The justices are there
through a political process.
But what you have to step
back and think about is,
are the justices, when
they make decisions,
acting in a partisan way?
And that's where, at least
I still believe, that the
institution is not partisan.
I remember, during today's
hearing, Senator Graham being
very frustrated and saying, gee,
when Justice Scalia went
through here, it was 97-0.
When Justice Ginsburg, a
Democratic appointee, went
through here, it was 93 or 96-0.
What has happened?
Well, I think both I
think the executive
branch and the legislative
branch share the blame.
Republicans and Democrats
share the blame.
The way this particular vacancy
has been handled has really
upped the political stakes.
And there's a cost.
There's a cost to Judge
Gorsuch, who has had to set
-- prove his independence.
And then there's a
cost to the institution
of the Supreme Court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Karlan,
where do you come down on just
how political this whole thing
is?
PAM KARLAN: I don't think this
is so much political, as it
is fundamental disagreements
in America about what our
Constitution means and
about how to interpret it.
And those map on sometimes
to partisan divisions, but I
think they're bigger than that.
And it's a profound moment in
our constitutional history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Howe,
you get the last word on the
politics of this whole thing.
AMY HOWE: Well, I tend to
agree with Marcia that there's
politics at the court, but not
necessarily partisanship.
But I do think, you know,
Senator John Kennedy
of Louisiana kind of
went off-message today.
He told Gorsuch that: Many of
my constituents voted for Trump
because of the Supreme Court.
And that's why Trump put out
the list that Gorsuch was
on, was to try and get...
JUDY WOODRUFF:
During the campaign.
AMY HOWE: During the campaigns
-- to get the votes of social
conservatives, to reassure
them that he was going
to appoint someone that
would make them happy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
that wasn't the message that
maybe they intended to get
out there.
AMY HOWE: That is certainly
not the message that Judge
Gorsuch was advancing today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we
did -- today was the second day.
And it looks like they
may go in tomorrow.
We're waiting to see how much
longer things go tonight.
We are going to be back with
the four of you tomorrow.
And we thank you all very much.
Amy Howe, Pam Karlan, Marcia
Coyle, Ilya Shapiro, thank you.
ILYA SHAPIRO: Thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: Thanks, Judy.
AMY HOWE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Great
Barrier Reef along the coast of
Australia is considered one of
the greatest natural
wonders of the world.
It actually consists of more
than 2,900 smaller reefs and 900
islands and countless species
of fish.
But its health and future
are very much in doubt.
Miles O'Brien has the story
for our weekly segment on the
Leading Edge of science and
technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: Half the size
of Texas, spanning 1,400 miles,
Australia's Great Barrier Reef
is the largest living
structure on the planet.
It is rich in beauty and
diversity, but it is dying, as
the ocean waters steadily warm.
DAVID WACHENFELD, Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park Authority: It's
a very confronting situation.
And I hope the people of the
world take this as a call to
action to do more about climate
change.
MILES O'BRIEN: Coral reef
ecologist David Wachenfeld is
director for reef recovery at
the Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park Authority.
It's the second consecutive
summer of extensive
coral destruction, or
bleaching, on the reef.
DAVID WACHENFELD: We are using
aerial surveys and underwater
surveys to try and cover that
whole enormous area of the Great
Barrier Reef to get a handle
on the extent and severity
of the event.
But, certainly, this year is
shaping up to be another very
bad year, as was last year.
MILES O'BRIEN: Last
year, two-thirds of the
corals in the northern
part of the Great Barrier
Reef died, the worst
die-off in history.
As for this year, it
is too early to tell.
But the outlook is grim,
as this is one big piece
of an unprecedented
global coral crisis.
C. MARK EAKIN, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration:
Since June of '14, we have
had continuous bleaching
somewhere in the world.
Globally, over 70 percent of
the coral reefs around the
globe have been exposed to the
high temperatures
that cause bleaching.
MILES O'BRIEN: Coral
reef ecologist Mark Eakin
is the coordinator for
the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration's
Coral Reef Watch.
He relies on data from
scientific satellites
operated by NOAA, the
Europeans, and the Japanese
that measure ocean
water temperature.
He, along with David
Wachenfeld, is co-author
of a new study published
in the journal "Nature"
documenting the link between
warm waters and dying coral
in the Great Barrier Reef.
C. MARK EAKIN: What we did
here at Coral Reef Watch was to
provide the satellite data that
gives the information on
the areas where the high
temperatures occurred.
So, there are charts in there
showing where the bleaching was
worst and where the temperatures
were highest for the
longest time, and the
correlation between that
heat stress and where
the bleaching occurred
was very high.
MILES O'BRIEN: Coral reefs
are the rain forests of
the sea, brimming with
mind-boggling diversity
that is still not
fully explored.
JENNIFER SMITH, Scripps
Institution of Oceanography:
Despite the fact that
coral reefs occupy a
very small footprint of the
overall Earth's surface, less
than 0.1 percent, an area about
the size of the country of
France, they're home to more
species of marine organisms than
any other marine
ecosystem on the planet.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jen Smith
is associate professor
in marine biology at
the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography at
the University of
California, San Diego.
We met at Scripps' Birch
Aquarium, home to some
spectacular displays
of reef ecosystems
to nurture curious minds and,
behind the scenes, an extensive
nursery to nurture the coral
itself.
Most corals are nourished
through a symbiotic
relationship with algae,
that convert sunlight
into energy, which
the corals tap into.
JENNIFER SMITH: So, it's like
having a garden growing in your
stomach where 90 percent of
your daily nutrition
comes directly from that
garden in your stomach.
MILES O'BRIEN: The pigments
in the algae are the source
of the vivid rainbow of colors
in a healthy coral reef.
But the algae are very
temperature-sensitive.
A few degrees warmer
than normal, and their
photosynthesis is enhanced.
That may sound good,
but the unfortunate
byproduct is a toxin.
So, the coral is forced to spit
out its food source, revealing
its white color, thus the
term bleaching.
Jen Smith showed me Birch's
display of an unhealthy
bleached coral reef.
JENNIFER SMITH: As long as you
still see white skeleton, that's
usually an indication that
the coral is still alive,
because, as soon as the tissue
starts dying, your seaweed will
start settling on that skeleton
and start growing over it.
So, within a matter of a few
weeks or even a month during
a bleaching event, you will
have an idea of whether that
coral is dead and getting
overgrown by seaweed, or whether
it's on its way to recovery.
MILES O'BRIEN: The sustained
global bleaching event
is not giving corals
a chance to recover.
Many coral reefs are further
stressed by other types of human
activity: runoff from sewage,
agriculture, and overfishing.
But scientists say the current
bleaching is happening whether
those local factors are
present or not.
It is clear warming water is
the culprit, and reducing our
use of fossil fuels is the
only solution.
Scientists say the world
must adhere to obligations
to do just that made
by 195 nations in Paris
in 2015.
C. MARK EAKIN: This is really
the only thing that's going
to deal with this global coral
bleaching problem.
Even if we do, though,
we're going to lose a
lot of coral reefs.
MILES O'BRIEN: But the Trump
administration is filled with
climate change skeptics pushing
to roll back Obama-era
regulations aimed at
reducing greenhouse gases.
So, what if we do nothing
to slow climate change?
JENNIFER SMITH: Corals reefs
as we know them will not exist
in the next 10, 20, 30 years.
We could single-handedly be
responsible for the extinction
of an entire ecosystem.
MILES O'BRIEN: Coral reefs are
more than spectacular, vivid
examples of nature's beauty.
The fish they harbor are also a
food source for a half-billion
people, and natural barriers
against storms and floods.
But, before too long, they
may only exist behind glass.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," La Jolla, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clearly,
they are a global treasure.
Let's hope more attention
is paid to how to save them.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday: the planned
vote on the Republican
replacement for Obamacare.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.